 Introduction to Data Engineering

1. You are the Chief Data Architect for a global e-commerce company. You have three distinct data requirements:

Order Processing: The checkout system must instantly record sales and update inventory with zero latency.
Strategic Planning: Analysts need to query 5 years of historical sales data to predict next season's trends.
Sentiment Research: The team wants to store millions of raw customer support audio recordings for potential future analysis.
Which combination of tools correctly maps to these three requirements?

[] 1. Data Warehouse, 2. Relational Database, 3. Data Lake
[x] 1. Relational Database, 2. Data Warehouse, 3. Data Lake
[] 1. Data Lake, 2. Relational Database, 3. Data Warehouse
[] 1. Relational Database, 2. Data Lake, 3. Data Warehouse


2. A massive online library is digitizing millions of ancient manuscripts as high-resolution image files.
The organization wants to store these raw files cheaply for indefinite future research but has no immediate plan for how to analyze them. 
Which storage solution is most appropriate? - Data Lake

3. Why is the role of Data Engineering considered a prerequisite for successful Artificial Intelligence and Large Language Model (LLM) implementation? - 
Data Engineers provide the clean, high-quality, and structured data necessary to prevent AI from generating errors or 'hallucinations'.

4. A Smart City Traffic Control Center needs to prevent gridlock. 
They must ingest data from thousands of road sensors and adjust traffic light timing immediately when a jam is detected. 
Which processing approach and justification are correct for this scenario? - Stream Processing

5. A bank manager wants to run a complex analytical SQL query to check 10-year transaction trends, 
but the IT department prohibits running this on the core banking database used for ATM transactions.
What is the technical reason for this restriction and what is the correct alternative? - 

Reason: Transactional databases are optimized for fast, small transactions, 
and a heavy analytical query would slow down live ATM operations. Alternative: Use a Data Warehouse.

6. A music streaming service collects logs of user listening habits.
Each log entry is a JSON file containing a User ID and Song ID, 
but also includes variable fields like 'skipped_at_second' or 'network_type' that differ from user to user. 
How is this data classified and why?

Semi-structured Data: Because it has some organizational markers (tags/keys) but lacks a rigid schema, allowing for flexible fields.

7. A Data Engineer needs to combine a sales transaction table with a separate customer demographics table to enrich the sales data with location details. 
This process of linking two different structured datasets is critical for which phase of the data pipeline? - Data Transformation

8. A construction firm possesses a dataset consisting of scanned PDF invoices, drone video footage of sites, and audio recordings of safety meetings. 
Which data category does this belong to? - Unstructured Data.

9. A Data Scientist attempts to train a model but finds the dataset contains duplicate records, null values in critical fields, and dates in mixed formats.
Which stage of the Data Engineering lifecycle was likely skipped or performed poorly? - Data Transformation

10. Which description best captures the primary architectural role of Data Engineering within a technology organization? - 
It functions as the 'plumbing' infrastructure, building and maintaining pipelines that reliably move and transform data from various sources to analytical destinations.

---------------------------------------------
Writing Efficient Queries : 
---------------------------------------------

1. Which of the following best describes the performance issue associated with a Correlated Subquery when compared to a well-optimized JOIN?
- The subquery must be re-executed once for every row processed by the outer query, forcing an inefficient row-based iteration

2. A data engineer needs to calculate the total sales for the top 100 products. The query involves joining a 1 billion-row Sales table to a 500-row Products table. 
Which of the following approaches provides the most efficient solution?
- Aggregate the 1 billion-row Sales table first (GROUP BY product_id), and then join the resulting small aggregate table to the Products table.

3. What is the primary reason for avoiding SELECT * in production data pipeline queries, especially in cloud data warehouses?
-It forces the database to read and transmit all columns from storage, increasing I/O latency and the 'bytes scanned' cost.

4. In a distributed data warehouse environment (e.g., BigQuery or Snowflake),
why is an ORDER BY clause without a LIMIT considered a severe performance anti-pattern?
- It forces a massive data movement (shuffle) to a single coordinator node for a final global sort, creating a major bottleneck

5. A data engineer needs to find all distinct film categories that have at least one film currently available in inventory. They compare two queries: Query A: SQL

SELECT name FROM category c 
WHERE EXISTS (
    SELECT 1 FROM film_category fc 
    JOIN inventory i ON fc.film_id = i.film_id 
    WHERE fc.category_id = c.category_id
);
Query B: SQL

SELECT DISTINCT c.name FROM category c 
JOIN film_category fc ON c.category_id = fc.category_id 
JOIN inventory i ON fc.film_id = i.film_id;
Which query is superior for performance, and why?
- Query A is superior because the EXISTS operator immediately stops searching the secondary tables 
once the first available film is found, preventing row explosion and costly sorting.

6. A data engineer needs to identify all films in the Sakila film table that have never been featured in any rental transaction. They are comparing two logical approaches: Query A: SQL

SELECT f.title FROM film f 
WHERE NOT EXISTS (
    SELECT 1 FROM inventory i 
    JOIN rental r ON i.inventory_id = r.inventory_id 
    WHERE i.film_id = f.film_id
);
Query B: SQL

SELECT f.title FROM film f 
LEFT JOIN inventory i ON f.film_id = i.film_id 
LEFT JOIN rental r ON i.inventory_id = r.inventory_id 
GROUP BY f.film_id 
HAVING COUNT(r.rental_id) = 0;
- Query A is preferred because it avoids processing and aggregating all the historical rental records for a film as soon as a rental is found, 
preventing unnecessary work.

7. Your fraud detection system queries a log table where 98% of transactions are status = 'APPROVED'. 
The critical query searches for status = 'REJECTED'. What is the most appropriate action for indexing the status column?
-Do not create an index; the optimizer will prefer a full table scan due to low selectivity for the 'REJECTED' value

8. An index exists on tickets(priority, assignee, status). Which query will not be able to use the index effectively because it violates the leftmost prefix rule?
- WHERE assignee = 'John' AND status = 'Open'

9. An index is defined as: (userid, sessionstart). Which query can successfully utilize this index, even if the filter order in the WHERE clause is different?
- WHERE sessionstart > '2025-01-01' AND userid = 42

10. An analyst runs this query on the 100M-row transactions table: SELECT country, SUM(amount) FROM transactions GROUP BY country;.
Which single index provides the best performance boost for this aggregation?
-(country)

11. An author frequently uses a query to find draft articles: SELECT id FROM drafts WHERE title LIKE 'Draft-%';.
What is the correct indexing advice for the title column?
-Yes, a normal B-Tree index on title is effective because the prefix is fixed

---------------------------------------------
Writing Efficient Queries 2 : 
---------------------------------------------

1. A data engineering team designs a system to handle billions of web events daily using the following schema:
   The primary use case is generating daily reports by calculating sums and averages using only clicks, scrolldepth, and browsertype. 
   Which storage model offers the best solution for this specific workload? - 
   Column-based storage with no additional indexing ✓

2. A transactional application frequently performs operations that read a single customer record, update several fields (e.g., address, phone, account status) within that record, and then write the complete record back to disk. 
   Which storage model is intrinsically more efficient for this workload? - 
   Row-based storage

3. In a database, what is the fundamental difference in data organization between Row-based storage and Column-based storage?-
   Row-based stores all values for a single row contiguously; Column-based stores all values for a single column contiguously.

4. Which column characteristic is the primary requirement for a Bitmap Index to be an efficient indexing strategy? - 
   Low Cardinality (few unique values)

5. What is the standard SQL operation or concept used to transform a column containing an array (repeated data) of structured 
   elements into a set of separate, normalized rows?   -
   UNNEST (or FLATTEN) : The UNNEST operation is used in SQL to expand an array or repeated field into multiple rows.

6. A financial company's database processes numerous complex analytical queries combining filters on three columns: 
   ProductSegment (10 values), Region (5 values), and IsSettled (True/False). 
   Which index type is most suitable for optimizing these specific read-heavy queries? - 
   Bitmap Index on all three columns   

7. A table has a B-Tree index on the creation_date column. Which of the following SQL WHERE clauses 
   will likely force a full table or full index scan instead of using the index efficiently?   --
   WHERE YEAR(creation_date) = 2024

8. Comparing Row-based and Column-based storage, 
    which statement accurately reflects their typical performance trade-offs for analytical workloads?   --- 
    Column-based storage requires less I/O when reading only a subset of columns for analysis.
    In column-based storage, data is stored column by column rather than row by row. This means that when a query only needs a few columns,
    the database reads only those columns from disk, reducing the amount of I/O.

9. An executive dashboard currently takes 15 seconds to load because it executes a complex query that joins five large tables 
   and calculates four different summary metrics. The underlying data only changes once every 24 hours. 
   The goal is to reduce the dashboard load time to under 1 second without modifying the application code that displays the data. 
   Which database object should be created to achieve this goal?    ---
   A Materialized View, refreshed daily 
   A materialized view stores the precomputed result of a query physically on disk instead of computing it every time it is requested.

10. A database stores information about customer orders. To avoid numerous JOIN operations, a single row in the Orders table contains a nested field called LineItems,
    which is an array of structs (containing productid, quantity, and price).
    A financial analyst needs to calculate the total quantity of a specific product sold across all orders. 
    Which approach is necessary to satisfy this query requirement?   ---
    Use the UNNEST operator on the Line_Items field, then filter and SUM the resulting rows.

11. What is the primary technical advantage of using a Materialized View over a standard View in a data analysis environment? --
    A standard View stores the query definition; a Materialized View stores the actual data results.

12. The primary purpose of database partitioning is to: -- 
     Break a large table into smaller, more manageable physical pieces based on a key.

13. A data warehouse team has a 5-year history table containing billions of log entries, all indexed by a log_timestamp column. 
    They need to frequently run queries that only hit the last 3 months of data, 
    and they also want to implement a cost-saving policy to archive or delete data older than 3 years easily. 
    Which partitioning strategy should they adopt?     ---
    Range Partitioning on the log_timestamp column, 
    creating monthly partitions for efficient query pruning and easy detachment of old data.

----------------------------------------------
Intro to Hadoop
----------------------------------------------

1. What was the primary reason for the creation of Apache Hadoop? - 
    To handle large-scale distributed data processing
2. Which of the following best describes horizontal scaling? - 
   Adding more machines to a cluster
3. In a Hadoop cluster, which component is responsible for resource management? - 
   Apache Hadoop YARN
4. What is the role of the ResourceManager in YARN? - 
   Allocates cluster resources
5. Which component runs on each worker node in YARN? - 
   NodeManager
6. What is a “container” in YARN? - 
    A unit of CPU and memory allocated for tasks
7. What happens first when a job is submitted in YARN? - 
   ResourceManager allocates resources
8. Which of the following is NOT a component of YARN? - 
   DataNode
9. Why was YARN introduced in Hadoop? - 
   To separate resource management from processing
10. Which scheduling strategy ensures fair resource sharing among applications?  

----------------------------------------------
HDFS and MAP-REDUCE
----------------------------------------------

1. What is the default block size in HDFS (commonly in modern Hadoop)? -- 138 MB
2. Which component in HDFS stores metadata (file name, block locations)? 
 -- NameNode - NameNode is responsible for storing the metadata of the file system.
3. What is the default replication factor in HDFS? - 3
4. During HDFS read operation, where does the client fetch data from? - DataNode 
5. What happens when a DataNode fails in HDFS? --- Data is recovered using replication
6. In MapReduce, which phase is responsible for grouping similar keys together? --- Shuffle & Sort
7. What is the main purpose of the Map phase in MapReduce? --- Convert input into key-value pairs
8. Which component determines how data is distributed to reducers? --- Partitioner
9. What is the role of a Combiner in MapReduce? --- Local aggregation before shuffle
10. Why is MapReduce considered slower compared to modern frameworks like Apache Spark? -- It relies heavily on disk I/O between stages
    MapReduce writes intermediate results to disk after every stage, while Spark processes most data in memory.

----------------------------------------------
 Introduction to Hive
----------------------------------------------

1. Hive mainly focuses on: - Analytics and reporting
2. What happens when a user submits a Hive query? - Hive converts SQL into execution jobs
3. Which component manages the lifecycle of a Hive query? - Driver
4. Which component stores metadata about tables and databases? -- Metastore
5. Hive follows which schema approach? -- Schema-on-read
6. Which table type allows Hive to only reference data without owning it? -- External table
7. What is the main purpose of partitioning in Hive? --- 
   Improve query performance by dividing large tables into smaller, manageable parts based on column values
8. Bucketing in Hive is mainly used to: -- Improve joins and sampling   
9. Hive is NOT recommended for: --- Real-time dashboards
10. Which statement is FALSE? -- Hive replaces traditional databases

-----------------------------------
Advanced features of Hive
------------------------------------
1. A retail company collects daily sales data from 500 stores. The data is stored in Hadoop because of its large size. 
   The business team wants to analyze monthly sales using SQL-like queries without writing Java programs.
   Which tool is BEST suited for this requirement? ---
   Apache Hive

2. A retail company collects daily sales data from 500 stores. 
   The data is stored in Hadoop because of its large size. The business team wants to analyze monthly 
   sales using SQL-like queries without writing Java programs.
   Why is MapReduce not ideal for the business team?   ---
   It requires complex programming

3. A student runs a Hive query to calculate total sales by region. 
   The query runs for several minutes and then returns the result.
   What does Hive do FIRST after receiving the query?   ---- Converts the query into execution jobs

4. A student runs a Hive query to calculate total sales by region. 
   The query runs for several minutes and then returns the result.
   Which component manages the entire query lifecycle?    ---- Hive Driver

5. A beginner believes that Hive stores all table data inside the Metastore database.
   What is actually stored in the Hive Metastore?    ---- Table structure and metadata

6. A beginner believes that Hive stores all table data inside the Metastore database.
   Where is the real data stored?    ---- HDFS

7. A data engineering team wants Hive to query log files stored in HDFS, 
   but they do NOT want Hive to delete the files if the table is dropped.
   Which table type should be used?    ----- External table

8. A data engineering team wants Hive to query log files stored in HDFS, 
   but they do NOT want Hive to delete the files if the table is dropped.
   What happens to data when an external table is dropped?   ----- Data remains in HDFS

9. A dataset contains sales data for 5 years. Most queries filter data by year.
   What Hive feature will BEST improve performance?    ----- Partitioning

10. A dataset contains sales data for 5 years. Most queries filter data by year. 
    Why does partitioning improve performance? ---- Hive to scan only the relevant subset of data instead of the entire dataset.   

11. A startup needs real-time updates for user transactions and instant query responses.
    Is Hive suitable for this requirement?     ---- No, Hive is batch-oriented

12. A student asks why Hive allows loading unstructured data without defining a schema in advance.
    Which concept explains this behavior?     --- Schema-on-read

13. A student asks why Hive allows loading unstructured data without defining a schema in advance.
    Which system uses schema-on-write?   -----Traditional RDBMS

-------------------------------
 Basics of Spark
-------------------------------

1. What is Spark primarily designed for? ------- Distributed data processing
2. What is the fundamental data abstraction in Spark? --------- RDD (Resilient Distributed Dataset)
3. What does the Catalyst Optimizer do in Spark? ----- Optimizes DataFrame and SQL queries
4. Which of the following is a transformation in Spark? ------ 
    join() is a transformation because it combines two datasets and produces a new one.
5. What does Spark use to store metadata about RDDs and DataFrames? -----Lineage Graph
6. What is the difference between RDD and DataFrame? ------RDD is untyped, DataFrame has schema
7. Which of the following is a structured data source supported by Spark? -------  CSV . JSON , Parquet 
8. What does the explain() method do in Spark? -----display the execution plan of a query.
9. In Spark, broadcast joins are useful when: ----One table is small, the other is large


-------------------------------
 Spark Programming
-------------------------------

1. Which operation triggers actual execution in Spark? -- count
2. Which transformation is considered a narrow transformation? --- map
3. What is a shuffle in Spark? --- Moving data across partitions or nodes
4. Why does Spark try to minimize shuffles? ---- Shuffles involve network and disk I/O
5. Which operation is preferred over groupByKey for aggregation? --- reduceByKey
6. When should an RDD be cached? --- When it is reused across multiple actions
7. How does Spark recover a lost RDD partition? ---- By recomputing from lineage
8. What does sc.textFile() return? ----  An RDD of lines
9. What is the role of SparkContext? ----  Connects the application to the cluster
10. When should RDDs be preferred over DataFrames?  ---- For low-level transformations and custom logic
11.  

 
